---
layout: post
title: Science for all ages
excerpt: Thoughts on how to teach science.
tags: science education
---

I've recently made a transition from learning and practicing science in the higher realms of academia to teaching it in a primary school setting. This has been an interesting and instructive step, and I've been using it to think about how these different groups approach scientific topics and how the methods of teaching vary by age. 

The process of education is always a matter of finding the boundary between the known and the unknown and pushing that boundary further out into the unknown. This means that the best kind of learning almost always involves some basic amount of confusion. As a physics graduate student, I became very familiar with the feeling of not understanding something. In fact, it is in the realm of confusion that the researcher makes their home. As a student works his or her way up the academic ladder, the topics being discussed are found to be on looser footing. At first, one can learn about concepts from Wikipedia or standard science textbooks. Newer, more specialized information can then be found in field-specific books. After these resources are exhausted, one must turn to published academic papers, which often use a variety of different terminologies and conventions and which often only paint a partial picture anyway. And finally, out at the very edge of scientific knowledge, facts and concepts exist only in the minds of the experts, a realm of knowledge that can often be only hazily formed and full of inconsistencies. The whole purpose of scientific research is to iron out the details and remove the inconsistencies. A primary goal of the researcher is to alleviate their own confusion. 

Coming in from the very edge of understanding to where the workings of the world stand on firmer ground, we find a place for more conventional education. At any level, education seems to have some basic characteristics. First, a teacher must try to assess what his students already know. The boundaries of knowledge must be placed on a map. The next step is the crucial one of education, which is to push these boundaries outward. Although these steps are quite general, how they are performed can be very age dependent. 

Older students can be very much driven by concepts and ideas, abstract notions that can be created, shaped, and melded in the mental realm. Here, the joy of learning has a lot to do with seeing how ideas previously considered separate can be seen to be just different aspects of the same underlying reality. The main purpose of a science education at this level is unification, placing a variety of phenomena into one coherent framework. 

Younger students, on the other hand, are often not drawing from quite so wide a range of experiences. They are still collecting samples of what is possible in the world. One of the ideas that I have heard with regard to youth science education is the 'disruptive event', a demonstration that captures attention and demands explanation. If a balloon full of hydrogen erupts in a huge fireball when you hold a match to it, but a balloon full of nitrogen does not, an explanation is needed. If room temperature water placed into a vacuum chamber starts to boil, an explanation is needed. At this level, one of the main purposes of a science education is to demonstrate that explanations are possible, and that there are sets of physical laws that govern how the universe behaves. This is the first of a long series of steps to show that our world is a comprehensible place. 

I've really only just gotten started in education, and I'm sure that there is plenty I will learn as I go. For all the ways that I've suggested that scientific education needs to be approached differently for children and adults, in reality the lines between them are not nearly so neat. There are children who love abstract ideas, and there are adults who are still collecting information about what is possible in the world. And regardless of age or experience, everyone enjoys seeing something outside of the ordinary. By inspiring a sense of wonder in his or her students, an educator can empower them to take their learning into their own hands. 
